Annotating VCFs with MuTopia
============================

This tutorial walks through annotating a VCF file with mutational signature
assignments using a pre-trained MuTopia model. Each mutation in the VCF is
assigned posterior probabilities over model components (signatures), and
per-component mutation count estimates (Nk) are reported for the sample.

We also demonstrate the **whitelist** feature, which adapts the model for
samples sequenced with a targeted panel or exome capture kit rather than
whole-genome sequencing.

Prerequisites
-------------

Make sure the following tools are available on your ``PATH``:

- ``bcftools``
- ``bedtools``
- ``mutopia`` (install the MuTopia package)

Download data
-------------

Download the pre-trained model, reference G-Tensor dataset, and an example
VCF:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Pre-trained model
   wget -O model.pkl <MODEL_URL>

   # Reference G-Tensor dataset
   wget -O dataset.nc <DATASET_URL>

   # Example VCF
   wget -O sample.vcf.gz <VCF_URL>


Step 1: Set up the dataset
--------------------------

Before annotating mutations, we initialize the dataset with the model's
internal state (locus-level predictions and normalizers). This is a one-time
step per model/dataset pair -- the result can be reused across many samples.

.. code-block:: bash

   topo-model setup model.pkl dataset.nc dataset_setup.nc -@ 4

This writes ``dataset_setup.nc``, which contains the original dataset plus
the pre-computed model state needed for fast per-sample annotation.


Step 2: Annotate a VCF
----------------------

Now annotate the sample VCF against the set-up dataset:

.. code-block:: bash

   mutopia sbs annotate-vcf \
       model.pkl \
       dataset_setup.nc \
       sample.vcf.gz \
       -o sample_annotated.vcf

Each mutation in the output VCF receives an ``INFO`` field with log posterior
probabilities over model components. The estimated per-component mutation
fractions (Nk) are printed to stderr and recorded in the VCF header:

.. code-block:: text

   Estimated component fractions:
     SBS1    0.3421
     SBS5    0.2876
     SBS40   0.1503
     ...


Using a whitelist for panel/exome data
--------------------------------------

When mutations come from targeted sequencing (exome capture, gene panel),
the model needs to know which regions of the genome were actually assayed.
Without this information, the model assumes the entire genome was observed,
which biases signature assignments.

Provide a BED file of assayed regions with the ``--white-list`` flag:

.. code-block:: bash

   mutopia sbs annotate-vcf \
       model.pkl \
       dataset_setup.nc \
       sample.vcf.gz \
       --white-list capture_targets.bed \
       -o sample_annotated.vcf

The whitelist adjusts two things:

1. **Exposure correction** -- Per-region exposure terms are scaled by the
   fraction of each genomic window covered by the whitelist, so the model
   accounts for unobserved territory.

2. **Mutation filtering** -- Only mutations falling within whitelisted
   regions are included in the analysis, discarding off-target variants.


Additional options
------------------

The ``annotate-vcf`` command supports several additional options for
controlling mutation ingestion:

.. code-block:: text

   -m, --mutation-rate-file   Mutation rate bedgraph (required for clustering)
   --no-cluster               Skip mutation clustering
   -name, --sample-name       Sample name for multi-sample VCFs
   -chr, --chr-prefix         Chromosome name prefix (e.g. "chr")
   -fa, --fasta               Override the reference genome fasta path
   -@, --threads              Number of threads
   --no-pass-only             Include non-PASS variants

Run ``mutopia sbs annotate-vcf --help`` for the full list.
